intrinsics module with alternative implementations (#915)
fortran-lang/stdlib: doc/specs/stdlib_intrinsics.md

---
title: intrinsics
---

> # The `stdlib_intrinsics` module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Alternative and enhanced implementations of Fortran intrinsics functions
```

Author: Shouldn't the title follow the same formatting as all other modules? This phrase would be more appropriate in the description just afterwards, no? Also, if we add fast intrinsics which give lower precision for the sake of performance, I would say "Alternative and/or enhanced" such as to leave room also for them. I mention that in relation to https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib/pull/860

[TOC]

## Introduction

> The `stdlib_intrinsics` module provides replacements for some of the well known intrinsic functions found in Fortran compilers for which either a faster and/or more accurate implementation is found which has also proven of interest to the Fortran community.

Author: Do not quote me on this, my guess is that compilers have implemented and optimized for sequential summation, meaning, the result should respect the outcome one would get if exactly summing values from 1 to N in that specific order. In the chunked approach this constrain is purposely broken to introduce a distance between subsequent elements and potentially reduce the round-off error accumulation, which is what I've observed in practice.

<!-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -->
### `stdlib_sum` function

#### Description

> The `stdlib_sum` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when summing large arrays, for repetitive summation of smaller arrays consider the classical `sum`.

Author: No specific reason, when implementing the first version my first need was for reals and so that's what I proposed here. I can test if it also brings benefits for integers and extend the template.

> The `stdlib_sum` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when summing large arrays, for repetitive summation of smaller arrays consider the classical `sum`.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it should support also `integer`s, even if it just call the original intrinsic `sum` for `integer`s. So the API will be fully compatible with the intrinsic `sum`?
@perazz : any advices/preferences on this?

> The `stdlib_sum` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when summing large arrays, for repetitive summation of smaller arrays consider the classical `sum`.

Reviewer: From what I see in the code, implementing it would "just" be a matter of adding integer `kind`s to the templates, so yes I think it is definitely worthwhile, at least because a lazy user would find it surprising if integers are not supported. This regardless of performance that is certainly going to be good.

> The `stdlib_sum` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when summing large arrays, for repetitive summation of smaller arrays consider the classical `sum`.

Author: added in https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib/pull/915/commits/11fb5554b3892d8f2aea9d145531d4da955b078d

> The `stdlib_sum` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real`, `complex` or `integer` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when summing large arrays, for repetitive summation of smaller arrays consider the classical `sum`.

Reviewer 2: Could you provide an example for "large". E.g., 
```suggestion
The `stdlib_sum` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real`, `complex` or `integer` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when summing large (e..g, >2**10 elements) arrays, for repetitive summation of smaller arrays consider the classical `sum`.
```

Author: I've observed the benefits already from ~1000, but this might be architecture dependent. I'm considering removing this phrase as it might be too vague, it is more of a suggestion rather than a hard rule.

#### Syntax

`res = ` [[stdlib_intrinsics(module):stdlib_sum(interface)]] ` (x [,mask] )`

`res = ` [[stdlib_intrinsics(module):stdlib_sum(interface)]] ` (x, dim [,mask] )`

#### Status

Experimental

#### Class

Pure function.

#### Argument(s)

> `x`: N-D array of either `real` or `complex` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`x`: N-D array of either `real`, `complex` or `integer` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.
```
```suggestion
`x`: N-D array of either `real` or `complex` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.
```

`dim` (optional): scalar of type `integer` with a value in the range from 1 to n, where n equals the rank of `x`.

`mask` (optional): N-D array of `logical` values, with the same shape as `x`. This argument is `intent(in)`.

#### Output value or Result value

If `dim` is absent, the output is a scalar of the same `type` and `kind` as to that of `x`. Otherwise, an array of rank n-1, where n equals the rank of `x`, and a shape similar to that of `x` with dimension `dim` dropped is returned.

<!-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -->
### `stdlib_sum_kahan` function

#### Description

> The `stdlib_sum_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential complemented by an `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) strategy to reduce the round-off error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stdlib_sum_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real`, `complex` or `integer` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential complemented by an `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) strategy to reduce the round-off error:
```

> The `stdlib_sum_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real`, `complex` or `integer` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential complemented by an `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) strategy to reduce the round-off error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stdlib_sum_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `sum` for `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential complemented by an `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) strategy to reduce the round-off error:
```

```fortran
elemental subroutine kahan_kernel_<kind>(a,s,c)
    type(<kind>), intent(in) :: a
    type(<kind>), intent(inout) :: s
    type(<kind>), intent(inout) :: c
    type(<kind>) :: t, y
    y = a - c
    t = s + y
    c = (t - s) - y
    s = t
end subroutine
```

#### Syntax

`res = ` [[stdlib_intrinsics(module):stdlib_sum_kahan(interface)]] ` (x [,mask] )`

`res = ` [[stdlib_intrinsics(module):stdlib_sum_kahan(interface)]] ` (x, dim [,mask] )`

#### Status

Experimental

#### Class

Pure function.

#### Argument(s)

> `x`: 1D array of either `real` or `complex` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`x`: 1D array of either `real`, `complex` or `integer` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.
```

> `x`: 1D array of either `real`, `complex` or `integer` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`x`: 1D array of either `real` or `complex` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.
```

`dim` (optional): scalar of type `integer` with a value in the range from 1 to n, where n equals the rank of `x`.

`mask` (optional): N-D array of `logical` values, with the same shape as `x`. This argument is `intent(in)`.

#### Output value or Result value

> If `dim` is absent, the output is a scalar of the same `type` and `kind` as to that of `x`. Otherwise, an array of rank n-1, where n equals the rank of `x`, and a shape similar to that of `x` with dimension `dim` dropped is returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `dim` is absent, the output is a scalar of the same type and kind as to that of `x`. Otherwise, an array of rank n-1, where n equals the rank of `x`, and a shape similar to that of `x` with dimension `dim` dropped is returned.
```

#### Example

```fortran
{!example/intrinsics/example_sum.f90!}
```

<!-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -->
### `stdlib_dot_product` function

#### Description

> The `stdlib_dot_product` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when crunching large arrays, for repetitive products of smaller arrays consider the classical `dot_product`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stdlib_dot_product` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real`, `complex` or `integer` arrays. It follows a blocked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is the most efficient when operating on large arrays.
```

> The `stdlib_dot_product` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when crunching large arrays, for repetitive products of smaller arrays consider the classical `dot_product`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stdlib_dot_product` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real`, `complex` or `integer` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential as well as reducing the round-off error. This procedure is recommended when crunching large arrays, for repetitive products of smaller arrays consider the classical `dot_product`.
```

#### Syntax

`res = ` [[stdlib_intrinsics(module):stdlib_dot_product(interface)]] ` (x, y)`

#### Status

Experimental

#### Class

Pure function.

#### Argument(s)

> `x`: 1D array of either `real` or `complex` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`x`: 1D array of either `real`, `complex` or `integer` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.
```

`y`: 1D array of the same type and kind as `x`. This argument is `intent(in)`.

#### Output value or Result value

The output is a scalar of `type` and `kind` same as to that of `x` and `y`.

<!-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -->
### `stdlib_dot_product_kahan` function

#### Description

> The `stdlib_dot_product_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential , complemented by the same `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) used for `stdlib_sum` to reduce the round-off error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stdlib_dot_product_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real`, `complex` or `integer` arrays. It follows a blocked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential , complemented by the same `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) used for `stdlib_sum` to reduce the round-off error.
```

> The `stdlib_dot_product_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential , complemented by the same `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kahan_summation_algorithm) used for `stdlib_sum` to reduce the round-off error.

Author: I did not take content directly from Wikipedia, I just cited the wiki page the summarizes the kahan summation algorithm. Would such citation be problematic?

> The `stdlib_dot_product_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential , complemented by the same `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kahan_summation_algorithm) used for `stdlib_sum` to reduce the round-off error.

Reviewer 2: Ok.  Most content of WIkipedia is under CC BY-SA4.0, which states: "Share Alike—If you remix, transform, **or build upon the material,** you must distribute your contributions under the same license as the original."
To avoid any potential confusions/issues, maybe could you reference to the original paper: https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723 ?

> The `stdlib_dot_product_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential , complemented by the same `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) used for `stdlib_sum` to reduce the round-off error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `stdlib_dot_product_kahan` function can replace the intrinsic `dot_product` for 1D `real` or `complex` arrays. It follows a chunked implementation which maximizes vectorization potential, complemented by the same `elemental` kernel based on the [kahan summation](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363707.363723) used for `stdlib_sum` to reduce the round-off error.
```

#### Syntax

`res = ` [[stdlib_intrinsics(module):stdlib_dot_product_kahan(interface)]] ` (x, y)`

#### Status

Experimental

#### Class

Pure function.

#### Argument(s)

`x`: 1D array of either `real` or `complex` type. This argument is `intent(in)`.

`y`: 1D array of the same type and kind as `x`. This argument is `intent(in)`.

#### Output value or Result value

> The output is a scalar of `type` and `kind` same as to that of `x` and `y`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output is a scalar of the same type and kind as to that of `x` and `y`.
```
?
